add n26152 notes (#592)
bitcoin-core-review-club/website: _posts/2022-11-23-#26152.md

components: ["wallet"]
host: glozow
status: upcoming
commit: 898ad9d590
---

## Notes

- The wallet *funds* a transaction by selecting inputs to cover its payment amount(s) and the fee
  at the user's target feerate. This process is known as **coin selection**, which we have discussed in
previous review clubs [#22009](/22009), [#17526](/17526) and [#17331](/17331).

    - Notably, each candidate coin is considered using an "effective value," introduced in
      [PR #17331](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17331). This deducts the cost to spend
      this input at the target feerate from its `nValue`.

- Since [PR #7600](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/7600), the
  [`BlockAssembler`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/aeb395dcdbfe2b1a6c77ff218939a18afde3add9/src/node/miner.h#L164)
algorithm has used ancestor feerate, rather than individual feerate, to select transactions for
inclusion in blocks. This strategy also enables users to fee-bump transactions using [Child Pays for
Parent (CPFP)](https://bitcoinops.org/en/topics/cpfp/). We have discussed the `BlockAssembler`
implementation in a [previous review club meeting](/24538).

> - On the flip side of CPFP, when creating a transaction at a target feerate, if the wallet selects
>   UTXOs from lower-feerate unconfirmed transactions, it may underestimate the amount of fees to put
> on this transaction. This issue has been an open problem for years; see

Reviewer: I've expanded it a bit, there's a lot to cover here.
```suggestion
- The effective feerate of a transaction depends on the confirmation status of all of its parent transactions. If all parents are already confirmed, the effective feerate equals the feerate of the transaction itself. However, each unconfirmed parent transaction increases/decreases the effective feerate if the parent feerate was higher/lower than the target feerate. This behaviour is exactly the same as what we require for CPFP, but with CPFP we focus on boosting the parent transaction - whereas this PR deals with the wallet ensuring the child transaction receives the effective feerate the user intends. This issue has been an open problem for years; see
```

Author: I took a few issues with the wording but otherwise taken:

- the effective feerate depends on ancestors and all descendants of those ancestors, and not just parents
- a parent cannot increase the effective feerate of the transaction

Reviewer: > the effective feerate depends on ancestors and all descendants of those ancestors, and not just parents

Whoops, yes I meant ancestors instead of parents - sorry for the confusion.

> a parent cannot increase the effective feerate of the transaction

Interesting, I hadn't considered that asymmetry (that it can only decrease) - but you're absolutely right.

cost of ancestor fees, the selection process needs to be repeated; this strategy would (re)introduce
a looped coin selection algorithm and make changeless solutions much less common.

- Consider another solution which updates the "effective value" of a coin, reducing it by the fee
  necessary to bump its ancestor set to the target feerate: `effective_value = nValue -
cost_to_spend - min(0, target_feerate * ancestor_size - ancestor_fees)`. For example, if the target
feerate is 20sat/vB, the UTXO has type P2WPKH and value 100ksat, and transaction's ancestor fee and
vsize are 1200sat and 600vB respectively, the coin's effective value would be 100000sat -
(20sat/vB * 68vB) - (20sat/vB * 600vB - 1200sat) = 87840sat.

- However, this problem is much more complicated than simply using the ancestor size and fees of
  unconfirmed UTXOs:

    - Multiple UTXOs may come from the same transaction or share the same ancestry. We don't need to
      bump those transactions more than once.

    - An ancestor's feerate may be higher than the target feerate.

    - An ancestor may have a low feerate, but be already fee-bumped by another transaction in the
      mempool.

>     - If the transaction may replace something in the mempool, one or multiple transactions may be

Reviewer: Can this affect ancestors? I'd think this would only evict descendants, and thus not affect ancestor feerate?
```suggestion
    - If the transaction replaces an existing transaction in the mempool, one or multiple transactions may be
```

Author: took the grammaf fix and added an example

  clusters. It uses the epoch-based traversal strategy described in
[PR #17268](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17268) and first introduced in
[PR #17925](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17925).

- `MiniMiner` provides two functions: `CalculateBumpFees()` provides the bump fee for each UTXO
  independently, ignoring any cases where there are shared ancestries. This function is intended for
calculating effective values in `AvailableCoins`, when it is unknown exactly which coins might be
spent.  `CalculateTotalBumpFees()` provides the bump fee for a set of UTXOs to be spent together,
taking into consideration when UTXOs have shared ancestry. It is intended for calculating the final
fee to put on the transaction.

## Questions

1. Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or NACK](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)?

1. What issue does this PR solve?

1. In
   [`CalculateCluster`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/995107782a1a512811d54f7abf29249f351a7cbf#diff-c065d4cd2398ad0dbcef393c5dfc53f465bf44723348892395fffd2fb3bac522R1218),

> what does a transaction's "cluster" include?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
what does a transaction's "cluster" consist of?
```

Author: Done

Author: done

      bump those transactions more than once.

    - An ancestor's feerate may be higher than the target feerate.

    - An ancestor may have a low feerate, but be already fee-bumped by another transaction in the
      mempool.

    - If the transaction replaces existing transactions in the mempool, one or multiple transactions
      may be evicted. After these evictions, some transactions may now need bumping, and others may
      no longer need bumping. For example, if we may be replacing a previous CPFP child with an
      even higher feerate child.

- [PR #26152](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/26152) adds `MiniMiner`, a "mini" version of
  the block assembly algorithm designed to calculate the cost to bump an unconfirmed UTXO to a
target feerate.  It uses `MiniMiner` to include the fees to bump any unconfirmed ancestors when
funding a transaction.

- `MiniMiner` operates on a limited set of mempool entries rather than the entire mempool, and does not care
about consensus rules such as block size and sigop limits. The limited set includes the "clusters"
of each unconfirmed transaction from which the wallet might spend a UTXO from. A *cluster* includes

> all mempool entries "connected" to a transaction. This includes parents and children,
> ancestors and descendants, as well as "siblings" (a transaction that shares a parent) and
> "coparents," (a transaction that shares a child), etc.

Reviewer 2: It might help to point out that any ancestor and descendant of any transaction in the cluster is also in the cluster:

```suggestion
all mempool entries "connected" to a transaction. This includes direct parents and children,
ancestors and descendants, as well as transitively the ancestors and descendants of any connected transaction, e.g. "siblings" (a transaction that shares a parent), "coparents," (a transaction that shares a child), etc.
```

- The PR adds a `CTxMemPool::CalculateCluster` function to calculate a set of transactions'
  clusters. It uses the epoch-based traversal strategy described in
[PR #17268](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17268) and first introduced in
[PR #17925](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17925).

- `MiniMiner` provides two functions: `CalculateBumpFees()` provides the bump fee for each UTXO

>   independently, ignoring any cases where there are shared ancestries. This function is intended for

Reviewer 2: This sounds ambiguous to me. How about:

```suggestion
  independently, as if it were spent alone (ignoring that another UTXO may share its ancestry). This function is intended for
```
